India, officially the Republic of India, is a country in South Asia.
It is the world's seventh-largest country by area and the largest by population.
Bounded by the Indian Ocean on the south, the Arabian Sea on the southwest, and the Bay of Bengal on the southeast, it shares land borders with Pakistan to the west; China, Nepal, and Bhutan to the north; and Bangladesh and Myanmar to the east.
In the Indian Ocean, India is near Sri Lanka and the Maldives.
Modern humans had arrived on the Indian subcontinent from Africa by 55,000 years ago.
Their long, isolated occupation as hunter-gatherers made the region highly diverse.
Settled life emerged on the western margins of the Indus basin 9,000 years ago, evolving into the Indus Valley Civilisation by the third millennium BCE.
By 1200 BCE, an archaic form of Sanskrit had diffused into India from the northwest, its hymns recording the early dawnings of Hinduism.
India's pre-existing Dravidian languages were supplanted in the northern regions.
By 400 BCE, social differentiation by caste had consolidated within Hinduism.
Around the same time, Buddhism and Jainism had arisen, proclaiming social orders unlinked to heredity.
The emergence of the loose-knit Maurya and Gupta Empires, gave rise to wide-ranging cultural and scientific creativity, but their eras also witnessed a steady erosion of women's rights, and, by the end, the rigid institutionalisation of untouchability.
Across the first millennium CE, the Middle kingdoms of South India transmitted Dravidian language scripts and cultures to Southeast Asia.
Well before the millennium's end, Judaism, Christianity, Islam and Zoroastrianism had become established on India's southern and western coasts.
Early in the 2nd millennium, Muslim armies from Central Asia intermittently overran India's northern plaints, eventually establishing the Delhi Sultanate, and drawing India into the cosmopolitan networks of medieval Islam.
The Vijayanagara Empire created a long-lasting composite South Indian culture.
The religion of Sikhism, founded by Guru Nanak, emerged in the Punjab.
The Mughal Empire ushered in two centuries of economic expansion and relative peace, leaving a rich architectural legacy.
Gradually expanding rule of the British East India Company turned India into a colonial economy, but by the end had consolidated its sovereignty.
British Crown rule began in 1858.
The rights promised to Indians were granted slowly, but technological changes were introduced, and modern education and the public life took root.
A nationalist movement emerged in India, the first in the non-European British Empire.
Noted for nonviolent resistance after 1920, it became the primary factor in ending British rule.
In 1947, the British Indian Empire was partitioned into two independent dominions, a Hindu-majority dominion of India and a Muslim-majority dominion of Pakistan.
A large-scale loss of life and an unprecedented migration accompanied the partition.
Since 1950, India has been a federal republic, governed through a democratic parliamentary system.
It is a pluralistic, multilingual and multi-ethnic society.
India's population grew from 361 million in 1951 to over 1.4 billion in 2023.
Its fast-growing economy is a hub for information technology, with an expanding middle class.
India has reduced poverty, though alongside increasing economic inequality.
It is a nuclear-weapon state, with high military expenditure, and holds unresolved mid-20th-century disputes over Kashmir with its neighbours, Pakistan and China.
Socio-economic challenges include gender inequality, child malnutrition, and rising air pollution.
India's megadiverse land features four biodiversity hotspots.
Its wildlife is supported in protected habitats and traditionally viewed with cultural tolerance.
The Solar System is the gravitationally bound system of the Sun and the masses that orbit it, most prominently its eight planets, of which Earth is one.
The Solar System is an isolated single-star planetary system (not part of a larger star system) within the Milky Way Galaxy.
The system formed about 4.6 billion years ago when a dense region of a molecular cloud collapsed, creating the Sun and a protoplanetary disc from which the orbiting bodies assembled.
The Sun accounts for 99.86% of the Solar System's total mass.
Inside the Sun's core, hydrogen is fused into helium, releasing energy that is emitted through the Sun's photosphere.
This creates the heliosphere and a decreasing temperature gradient across the Solar System.
The next most massive objects of the system are the eight planets, which by definition dominate the orbits they occupy.
Closest to the Sun in order of increasing distance are the terrestrial planets – Mercury, Venus, Earth and Mars.
These four planets are part of the inner Solar System.
Earth and Mars are the only planets that orbit within the Sun's habitable zone, in which sunlight can keep surface water liquid under atmospheric pressure.
Beyond the frost line at about five astronomical units (AU), are the planets of the outer Solar System: two gas giants (Jupiter and Saturn) and two ice giants (Uranus and Neptune).
Jupiter and Saturn possess nearly 90% of the non-stellar mass of the Solar System.
Objects of planetary mass that do not dominate their orbit but directly orbit the Sun are called dwarf planets.
The International Astronomical Union's Minor Planet Center lists Ceres, Pluto, Eris, Makemake, and Haumea as dwarf planets.
Four other Solar System objects are generally identified as such: Orcus, Quaoar, Gonggong, and Sedna.
Less massive than the dwarf planets are the vast number of small Solar System bodies, such as asteroids, comets, centaurs, meteoroids, and interplanetary dust clouds.
The dwarf planet Ceres and many of these smaller bodies are located in the asteroid belt (between Mars's and Jupiter's orbit), while all other dwarf planets are members of populations of trans-Neptunian objects, which may be found in the Kuiper belt just outside Neptune or in the further scattered disc.
Many objects in the Solar System do not orbit the Sun directly and are instead natural satellites, commonly called 'moons', of larger bodies.
These can be found throughout the Solar System in sizes from planetary-mass moons at their largest to much less massive moonlets at their smallest.
The largest two moons (Ganymede of Jupiter and Titan of Saturn) are larger (though less massive) than the smallest planet (Mercury), while the seven most massive, which includes Earth's Moon, are more massive and larger than any of the dwarf planets.
Within the heliosphere, the Solar System is constantly flooded by the charged plasma particles of the solar wind, which, along with interplanetary dust, gas and cosmic rays, form an interplanetary medium between the bodies of the Solar System.
At around 70–90 AU from the Sun, the solar wind is halted by the interstellar medium, resulting in the heliopause and the border of the interplanetary medium to interstellar space.
The theorized Oort cloud – the source for long-period comets – extends from somewhere beyond 2,000 AU to the outermost region of the Solar System.
The latter reaches to the edge of the Sun's Hill sphere, at 178,000–227,000 AU (2.81–3.59 ly), where its gravitational potential becomes equal to the galactic potential.
The Solar System currently moves through a cloud of interstellar medium called the Local Cloud.
The closest star to the Solar System, Proxima Centauri, is 269,000 AU (4.25 ly) away.
Both are within the Local Bubble, a relatively small 1,000 light-years (ly) wide region of the Milky Way.
Water is an inorganic compound with the chemical formula H2O.
It is a transparent, tasteless, odorless, and nearly colorless chemical substance.
It is the main constituent of Earth's streams, lakes, and oceans.
Water is also the fluid of all known living organisms, in which it acts as a solvent.
Water, being a polar molecule, undergoes strong intermolecular hydrogen bonding which is a large contributor to its physical and chemical properties.
It is vital for all known forms of life, despite not providing food energy or being an organic micronutrient.
Due to its presence in all organisms, its chemical stability, its worldwide abundance, and its strong polarity relative to its small molecular size, water is often referred to as the "universal solvent".
Because Earth's surface temperature and pressure is relatively close to water's triple point, water exists on Earth as a solid, a liquid, and a gas.
It forms precipitation in the form of rain and aerosols in the form of fog.
Clouds consist of suspended droplets of water and ice, its solid state.
When finely divided, crystalline ice may precipitate in the form of snow.
The gaseous state of water is steam or water vapor.
Water covers about 71% of the Earth's surface, with seas and oceans making up most of the water volume (about 96.5%).
Small portions of water occur as groundwater (1.7%), in the glaciers and the ice caps of Antarctica and Greenland (1.7%), and in the air as vapor, clouds (consisting of ice and liquid water suspended in air), and precipitation (0.001%).
Water moves continuously through the water cycle of evaporation, transpiration (evapotranspiration), condensation, precipitation, and runoff, usually reaching the sea.
Water plays an important role in the world economy.
Approximately 70% of the fresh water used by humans goes to agriculture.
Fishing in salt and fresh water bodies has been, and continues to be, a major source of food for many parts of the world, providing 6.5% of global protein.
Much of the long-distance trade of commodities (such as oil, natural gas, and manufactured products) is transported by boats through seas, rivers, lakes, and canals.
Large quantities of water, ice, and steam are used for cooling and heating in industry and homes.
Water is an excellent solvent for a wide variety of substances, both mineral and organic; as such, it is widely used in industrial processes and in cooking and washing.
Water, ice, and snow are also central to many sports and other forms of entertainment, such as swimming, pleasure boating, boat racing, surfing, sport fishing, diving, ice skating, snowboarding, and skiing.
The tiger (Panthera tigris) is a large cat and a member of the genus Panthera native to Asia.
It has a powerful, muscular body with a large head and paws, a long tail and orange fur that fades to white in parts, with black, mostly vertical stripes.
It is traditionally classified into nine subspecies, though some recognise only two subspecies, the mainland Asian tiger and the Sunda Islands tiger.
Throughout its range, it inhabits mainly forests, from coniferous and temperate broadleaf and mixed forests in the Russian Far East and Northeast China to tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forests on the Indian subcontinent and Southeast Asia.
The tiger is an apex predator and preys mainly on hooved mammals, which it takes by ambush.
It lives a mostly solitary life and occupies home ranges, defending these from individuals of the same sex.
The range of a male tiger overlaps with that of multiple females with whom he mates.
Females give birth to usually two or three cubs that stay with their mother for about two years.
When becoming independent, they leave their mother's home range and establish their own.
Since the early 20th century, tiger populations have lost at least 93% of their historic range and are locally extinct in West and Central Asia, in large areas of China and on the islands of Java and Bali.
Today, the tiger's range is severely fragmented.
It is listed as Endangered on the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species, as its range is thought to have declined by 53% to 68% since the late 1990s.
Major threats to tigers are habitat destruction and fragmentation due to deforestation, poaching for fur and the illegal trade of body parts for medicinal purposes.
Tigers are also victims of human–wildlife conflict as they attack and prey on livestock in areas where natural prey is scarce.
The tiger is legally protected in all range countries.
National conservation measures consist of action plans, anti-poaching patrols and schemes for monitoring tiger populations.
In several range countries, wildlife corridors have been established and tiger reintroduction is planned.
The tiger is among the most popular of the world's charismatic megafauna.
It has been kept in captivity since ancient times and has been trained to perform in circuses and other entertainment shows.
The tiger featured prominently in the ancient mythology and folklore of cultures throughout its historic range and has continued to appear in culture worldwide.
Cricket is a bat-and-ball game that is played between two teams of eleven players on a field, at the centre of which is a 22-yard (20-metre; 66-foot) pitch with a wicket at each end, each comprising two bails (small sticks) balanced on three stumps.
Two players from the batting team, the striker and nonstriker, stand in front of either wicket holding bats, while one player from the fielding team, the bowler, bowls the ball toward the striker's wicket from the opposite end of the pitch.
The striker's goal is to hit the bowled ball with the bat and then switch places with the nonstriker, with the batting team scoring one run for each of these swaps.
Runs are also scored when the ball reaches the boundary of the field or when the ball is bowled illegally.
The fielding team aims to prevent runs by dismissing batters (so they are "out").
Dismissal can occur in various ways, including being bowled (when the ball hits the striker's wicket and dislodges the bails), and by the fielding side either catching the ball after it is hit by the bat but before it hits the ground, or hitting a wicket with the ball before a batter can cross the crease line in front of the wicket.
When ten batters have been dismissed, the innings (playing phase) ends and the teams swap roles.
Forms of cricket range from traditional Test matches played over five days to the newer Twenty20 format (also known as T20), in which each team bats for a single innings of 20 overs (each "over" being a set of 6 fair opportunities for the batting team to score) and the game generally lasts three to four hours.
Traditionally, cricketers play in all-white kit, but in limited overs cricket, they wear club or team colours.
In addition to the basic kit, some players wear protective gear to prevent injury caused by the ball, which is a hard, solid spheroid made of compressed leather with a slightly raised sewn seam enclosing a cork core layered with tightly wound string.
The earliest known definite reference to cricket is to it being played in South East England in the mid-16th century.
It spread globally with the expansion of the British Empire, with the first international matches in the second half of the 19th century.
The game's governing body is the International Cricket Council (ICC), which has over 100 members, twelve of which are full members who play Test matches.
The game's rules, the Laws of Cricket, are maintained by the Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC) in London.
The sport is primarily played in India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Afghanistan, Australia, New Zealand, England and Wales, South Africa and the West Indies.
While cricket has traditionally been played largely by men, women's cricket has experienced significant growth in the 21st century.
The most successful side playing international cricket is Australia, which has won eight One Day International trophies, including six World Cups, more than any other country, and has been the top-rated Test side more than any other country.
A monsoon () is traditionally a seasonal reversing wind accompanied by corresponding changes in precipitation, but now used to describe seasonal changes in atmospheric circulation and precipitation associated with annual latitudinal oscillation of the Intertropical Convergence Zone, specifically between its limits to the north and south of the equator.
Usually, the term monsoon is used to refer to the rainy phase of a seasonally changing pattern, although technically there is a dry phase.
The term is also used to describe locally heavy but short-term rains.
The major monsoon systems of the world consist of the West African, South Asian–Australian, North American, and South American monsoons.
The term was first used in English in British India and neighbouring countries, referring to big seasonal winds blowing from the Bay of Bengal and Arabian Sea in the southwest that brought heavy rainfall to the area.
Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi ( GA(H)N-dee; 2 October 1869 – 30 January 1948) was an Indian lawyer, anti-colonial nationalist, and political ethicist who employed nonviolent resistance to lead the successful campaign for India's independence from British rule, and to later inspire movements for civil rights and freedom across the world.
The honorific Mahātmā (Sanskrit: "great-souled", "venerable"), first applied to him in 1914 in South Africa, is now used throughout the world.
Born and raised in a Hindu family in coastal Gujarat, Gandhi was trained in the law at the Inner Temple in London and was called to the bar at the age of 22.
After two uncertain years in India, where he was unable to start a successful law practice, Gandhi moved to South Africa in 1893 to represent an Indian merchant in a lawsuit.
He went on to live in South Africa for the next 21 years.
Here, Gandhi raised a family and first employed nonviolent resistance in a campaign for civil rights.
In 1915, aged 45, he returned to India and soon set about organising peasants, farmers, and urban labourers to protest against discrimination and excessive land tax.
Assuming leadership of the Indian National Congress in 1921, Gandhi led nationwide campaigns for easing poverty, expanding women's rights, building religious and ethnic amity, ending untouchability, and, above all, achieving swaraj or self-rule.
Gandhi adopted the short dhoti woven with hand-spun yarn as a mark of identification with India's rural poor.
He began to live in a self-sufficient residential community, to eat simple food, and undertake long fasts as a means of both introspection and political protest.
Bringing anti-colonial nationalism to the common Indians, Gandhi led them in challenging the British-imposed salt tax with the 400 km (250 mi) Dandi Salt March in 1930 and in calling for the British to quit India in 1942.
He was imprisoned many times and for many years in both South Africa and India.
Gandhi's vision of an independent India based on religious pluralism was challenged in the early 1940s by Muslim nationalists who demanded a separate homeland for Muslims within British India.
In August 1947, Britain granted independence, but the British Indian Empire was partitioned into two dominions, a Hindu-majority India and a Muslim-majority Pakistan.
As many displaced Hindus, Muslims, and Sikhs made their way to their new lands, religious violence broke out, especially in Punjab and Bengal.
Abstaining from the official celebration of independence, Gandhi visited the affected areas, attempting to alleviate distress.
In the months following, he undertook several hunger strikes to stop the religious violence.
The last of these was begun in Delhi on 12 January 1948, when Gandhi was 78.
The belief that Gandhi had been too resolute in his defence of both Pakistan and Indian Muslims spread among some Hindus in India.
Among these was Nathuram Godse, a militant Hindu nationalist from Pune, western India, who assassinated Gandhi by firing three bullets into his chest at an interfaith prayer meeting in Delhi on 30 January 1948.
Gandhi's birthday, 2 October, is commemorated in India as Gandhi Jayanti, a national holiday, and worldwide as the International Day of Nonviolence.
Gandhi is considered to be the Father of the Nation in post-colonial India.
During India's nationalist movement and in several decades immediately after, he was also commonly called Bapu, an endearment roughly meaning "father".
Bengaluru, also known as Bangalore (its official name until 1 November 2014), is the capital and largest city of the southern Indian state of Karnataka.
As per the 2011 census, the city had a population of 8.4 million, making it the third most populous city in India and the most populous in South India.
The Bengaluru metropolitan area had a population of around 8.5 million, making it the fifth most populous urban agglomeration in the country.
It is located towards the southern end of the Deccan Plateau, at an altitude of 900 m (3,000 ft) above sea level.
The city is known as India's "Garden City", due to its parks and greenery.
Archaeological artefacts indicate that the human settlement in the region happened as early as 4000 BCE.
The first mention of the name "Bengaluru" is from an old Kannada stone inscription from 890 CE found at the Nageshwara Temple in Begur.
The region was ruled by the Western Ganga dynasty since 350 CE, and became part of the Chola Empire in the early eleventh century CE.
In the late Middle Ages, it formed a part of the Hoysala kingdom and then the Vijayanagara Empire.
In 1537 CE, Kempe Gowda I, a feudal ruler under the Vijayanagara Empire, established a mud fort which is considered the foundation of the modern city of Bengaluru with the earlier established areas (petes) still in existence.
After the fall of the Vijayanagara Empire, Kempe Gowda declared independence, and the city was expanded by his successors.
In 1638 CE, an Adil Shahi army defeated Kempe Gowda III, and the city became a jagir (feudal estate) of Shahaji.
The Mughals later captured the city and sold it to Chikka Devaraja Wodeyar, the Maharaja of the Kingdom of Mysore.
After the death of Krishnaraja Wodeyar II in 1759 CE, Hyder Ali seized control of the kingdom and with it, the administration of Bengaluru, which passed subsequently to his son, Tipu Sultan.
The city was captured by the British East India Company during the Anglo-Mysore Wars, and became part of the princely state of Mysore.
The administrative control of the city was returned to Krishnaraja Wodeyar III, then Maharaja of Mysore, and the old city re-developed under the dominion of the Mysore kingdom.
In 1809 CE, the British formed a military garrison in the city and established the cantonment outside the old city.
In the late 19th century CE, the city was composed of two distinct urban settlements, the old Pete and the new Cantonment.
Following India's independence in 1947, Bengaluru became the capital of Mysore State, and remained the capital when the state was enlarged and unified in 1956 and subsequently renamed as Karnataka in 1973.
The two urban settlements which had developed as independent entities, merged under a single urban administration in 1949.
Bengaluru is one of the fastest-growing metropolises in India.
As of 2024, the metropolitan area had an estimated GDP of $590.4 billion, and is one of the most productive metro areas of India.
The city is a major centre for information technology (IT), and is consistently ranked amongst the world's fastest growing technology hubs.
As the largest hub and exporter of IT services in the country, it is regarded as the "Silicon Valley of India".
Manufacturing is a major contributor to the economy with the city home to several state-owned units.
The city also hosts several prominent institutes of higher education and of national importance.
Rice is a cereal grain and, in its domesticated form, is the staple food of over half of the world's population, particularly in Africa and Asia.
Rice is the seed of the grass species Oryza sativa (Asian rice)—or, less commonly, Oryza glaberrima (African rice).
Asian rice was domesticated in China some 13,500 to 8,200 years ago; African rice was domesticated independently in West Africa about 3,000 years ago.
Rice has become commonplace in many cultures worldwide; in 2023, 800 million tons were produced, placing it third after sugarcane and maize.
Only some 8% of rice is traded internationally.
China, India, and Indonesia are the largest consumers of rice.
A substantial amount of the rice produced in developing nations is lost after harvest through factors such as poor transport and storage.
Rice yields can be reduced by pests including insects, rodents, and birds, as well as by weeds, and by diseases such as rice blast.
Traditional rice polycultures such as rice-duck farming, and modern integrated pest management seek to control damage from pests in a sustainable way.
Dry rice grain is milled to remove the outer layers; depending on how much is removed, products range from brown rice to rice with germ and white rice.
Some is parboiled to make it easy to cook.
Rice contains no gluten; it provides protein but not all the essential amino acids needed for good health.
Rice of different types is eaten around the world.
The composition of starch components within the grain, amylose and amylopectin, gives it different texture properties.
Long-grain rice, from the Indica cultivar, tends to stay intact on cooking, and is dry and fluffy.
The aromatic rice varieties, such as basmati and jasmine, are widely used in Asian cooking, and distinguished by their bold and nutty flavor profile.
Medium-grain rice, from either the Japonica or Indica cultivar, or a hybrid of both, is moist and tender and tends to stick together.
Its varieties include Calrose, which founded the Californian rice industry, Carnaroli, attributed as the king of Italian rice due to its excellent cooking properties, and black rice, which looks dark purple due to high levels of anthocyanins, and is also known as forbidden rice as it was reserved for the consumption of the royal family in ancient China.
Short-grain rice, primarily from the Japonica cultivar, has an oval appearance and sticky texture.
It is featured heavily in Japanese cooking such as sushi (with rice such as Koshihikari, Hatsushimo, and Sasanishiki, unique to different regions of climate and geography in Japan), as it keeps its shape when cooked.
It is also used for sweet dishes such as mochi (with glutinous rice), and in European cuisine such as risotto (with arborio rice) and paella (with bomba rice, which is actually an Indica variety).
Cooked white rice contains 29% carbohydrate and 2% protein, with some manganese.
Golden rice is a variety produced by genetic engineering to contain vitamin A.
Production of rice is estimated to have caused over 1% of global greenhouse gas emissions in 2022.
Predictions of how rice yields will be affected by climate change vary across geographies and socioeconomic contexts.
In human culture, rice plays a role in various religions and traditions, such as in weddings.
Mathematics is a field of knowledge concerned with abstract concepts such as numbers, geometric shapes, sets, functions, and probabilities.
It uses logical reasoning and proof to study and establish their properties, often expressed as theorems, formulas, and equations.
Mathematics is used to model and solve problems in science, engineering, technology, economics, and everyday life.
There are many areas of mathematics, including number theory (the study of integers and their properties), algebra (the study of operations and the structures they form), geometry (the study of shapes and spaces that contain them), analysis (the quantitative study of approximation and convergence), and set theory (presently used as a foundation for all mathematics).
Mathematics involves the description and manipulation of abstract objects that are either abstractions from nature or purely abstract entities that are stipulated to have certain properties, called axioms.
Mathematics uses pure reason to prove the properties of objects through proofs, which consist of a succession of applications of deductive rules to already established results.
These results, called theorems, include previously proved theorems, axioms, and—in case of abstraction from nature—some basic properties that are considered true starting points of the theory under consideration.
Mathematics is essential in the natural sciences, engineering, medicine, finance, computer science, and the social sciences.
Although mathematics is widely used to model empirical phenomena, its results are established by deductive proof rather than by experiment.
The relationship between mathematical truth, logic, and reality is a subject of philosophical debate.
Some areas of mathematics, such as game theory, are developed in close correlation with their applications and are often grouped under applied mathematics.
Other areas are developed independently from any application but often find practical applications later.
Mathematical written records first appeared in Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia, but the concept of proof and its associated mathematical rigor began in Ancient Greek mathematics, exemplified in Euclid's Elements.
Mathematics was primarily divided into geometry and arithmetic until the 16th and 17th centuries, when algebra and infinitesimal calculus evolved into new fields.
Since then, the interaction between mathematical innovations and scientific discoveries has led to a correlated increase in the development of both.
At the end of the 19th century, the foundational crisis of mathematics led to the systematic use of the axiomatic method, which heralded a dramatic increase in the number of mathematical areas and their fields of application.
The contemporary Mathematics Subject Classification lists more than sixty first-level areas of mathematics.
